Provided for non-commercial research and educational use.
Not for reproduction, distribution or commercial use.
This article was originally published in the Reference Module in Materials Science and Materials Engineering,
published by Elsevier, and the attached copy is provided by Elsevier for the author’s benefit and for the benefit of the
author’s institution, for non-commercial research and educational use including without limitation use in instruction
at your institution, sending it to specific colleagues who you know, and providing a copy to your institution’s
administrator.

All other uses, reproduction and distribution, including without limitation commercial reprints, selling or licensing
copies or access, or posting on open internet sites, your personal or institution’s website or repository, are prohibited.
For exceptions, permission may be sought for such use through Elsevier’s permissions site at:
http://www.elsevier.com/locate/permissionusematerial
Walko D.A., Multicircle Diffractometry Methods. In: Saleem Hashmi (editor-in-chief), Reference Module in Materials
Science and Materials Engineering. Oxford: Elsevier; 2016. pp. 1-10.
ISBN: 978-0-12-803581-8
Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. unless otherwise stated. All rights reserved.

Author's personal copy
Multicircle Diffractometry Methods$
DA Walko, Argonne National Laboratory, Argonne, IL, USA
r 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1
Introduction
2
Four-Circle Eulerian Geometry
3
Angle Calculations
3.1
The Diffraction Equation
3.2
Determining the Orientation Matrix
3.3
Operating Modes
3.4
Equivalent Angle Settings
4
Alternative Four-Circle Geometries
4.1
Kappa Geometry
4.2
Four-Circle General-Inclination Geometries
5
Five-Circle and Six-Circle Diffractometers
Acknowledgments
Further Reading

Nomenclature
ai, ai (i¼1–3)
bi, bi (i¼ 1–3)
B

d
h
hc
hl
h/
K

1

real-space lattice parameters (Å , deg)
reciprocal-space lattice parameters
(Å 1, deg)
matrix which produces a Cartesian
coordinate system for reciprocal space
(Å 1)
lattice-plane spacing (Å )
reciprocal lattice vector (reciprocal
lattice units)
reciprocal lattice vector in Cartesian
coordinates (Å 1)
reciprocal lattice vector in lab frame
(Å 1)
reciprocal lattice vector in frame of f
axis (Å 1)
diffracted wave vector (Å 1)

1
2
4
4
6
6
7
7
7
8
9
10
10

K0
N
Q
R(ζ)
U
a0
c, δ, η, a
δ, ν, η, l
2h
2h, h, χ, /
2h, hκ, κ, /κ
k
w

incident wave vector (Å 1)
reference vector (Å 1)
scattering vector (Å 1)
rotation matrix describing the effect of
diffractometer axis ζ (unitless)
orientation matrix (unitless)
kappa diffractometer angle (deg)
Z-axis diffractometer angles (deg)
S2D2 diffractometer angles (deg)
total scattering angle (deg)
four-circle Eulerian diffractometer
angles (deg)
kappa diffractometer angles (deg)
wavelength (Å )
azimuthal angle (deg)

Introduction

When a monochromatic, collimated beam of radiation (either X-rays or neutrons) is incident upon a stationary single crystal, the
diffraction condition will probably be satisﬁed for few, if any, reﬂections, depending on a number of parameters such as the size of
the unit cell, crystal mosaicity, and the energy spread of the radiation. It is even less likely that any particular reﬂection will be
observed, and useful information, such as a reﬂection's integrated intensity, is not immediately available. Over the years, several
methods of collecting scattering data have developed. The earliest X-ray experiments were performed with polychromatic radiation
and a two-dimensional (2D) detector, namely, photographic ﬁlm; known as the Laue method, this technique has remained useful
for quick sample alignment and has found new use in permitting an entire diffraction pattern to be collected in a very brief
exposure. The powder-diffraction method uses a sample ground to a powder, effecting an ensemble average over all sample
orientations; a powder-diffraction pattern is then collected with a 1D scan of the detector. The rotation method consists of rotating
a single-crystal sample through a given angle while measuring the pattern on a 2D detector with the use of charge-coupled device
(CCD) detectors or 2D pixel detectors; this is the standard technique for macromolecular protein crystallography. While the above
methods are practical for collecting integrated intensities of sharp, well-deﬁned Bragg points, they may compromise on
☆
Change History: April 2015. D. Walko made many changes for grammar and word choice throughout. Acknowledgment is updated. Error in eqn [5] is ﬁxed.
Last paragraph is rewritten.

Reference Module in Materials Science and Materials Engineering

doi:10.1016/B978-0-12-803581-8.01215-7

1

Author's personal copy
2

Multicircle Diffractometry Methods

measurement of diffuse features. As an alternative, multicircle diffractometry uses computerized control of a high-precision
goniometer (i.e., angle-positioning instrument) in order to hold both sample and detector at precise orientations, becoming a
powerful tool to provide quantitative scattering data at well-deﬁned positions in reciprocal space. Traditionally, monochromatic
radiation is used and data collected by a point detector (a detector with a small, well-deﬁned aperture set by slits).
Multicircle diffractometry is regularly applied to studies of systems in which orientational information cannot be sacriﬁced,
such as measurement of pole ﬁgures for texture analysis or residual stress analysis; grazing-incidence or grazing-exit diffraction for
studies of surfaces, thin ﬁlms, and superlattices; and observation of diffuse scattering due to short-range order, defects such as
twins or voids, or thermal diffuse scattering. Two examples of scattering data that require multicircle collection methods are shown
in Figure 1. The reciprocal-space map in Figure 1(a) is from a Ni ﬁlm grown on MgO(0 0 1); the peaks in the diffraction pattern are
used to identify the various epitaxial orientations of the Ni crystal relative to the substrate, as well as the ﬁlm's strain and mosaic
spread. Figure 1(b) shows integrated intensities from two truncation rods of an epitaxial SrTiO3 ﬁlm on Si(0 0 1); the rods are
continuous, diffuse features which can be analyzed to determine the atomic structure of the ﬁlm and interface. The foremost
drawback of multicircle diffractometer methods, compared to the other methods mentioned above, is that data are collected
relatively slowly, often one point at a time rather than over a wide range of reciprocal space at once. The fairly involved
calculations of the technique, described in some detail below, are no longer the issue that they once were, given the power and
economy of modern computers; various diffractometer-control software packages are available.
In this article, several geometries of multicircle diffractometers, beginning with the standard four-circle Eulerian diffractometer,
are reviewed. An overview of the transformation between reciprocal space and angle space is given, and various options in
operating a diffractometer are described. Other diffractometer geometries will then be presented, including alternate four-circle
geometries, then progressing to ﬁve- and six-circle geometries. Throughout the article, an attempt is made to point out potential
sources of confusion, such as those caused by conﬂicting systems of nomenclature; correspondingly, the names of angles used here
may differ from those in the literature or those implemented on various instruments. In that vein, it is to be noted that this article
uses the term ‘multicircle diffractometers’ to refer to instruments whose circles rotate the sample or detector; additional circles,
which are used for polarization analysis or wavelength-dispersive analysis of the radiation, are not counted.

2

Four-Circle Eulerian Geometry

The basic four-circle diffractometer geometry is shown in Figure 2. The sample sits at the center of rotation on the f circle, which
rotates on the χ circle. The χ and f circles together constitute an Eulerian cradle, for which this geometry is named. The Eulerian
cradle then rotates on the y circle. The detector rotates independently on the 2y circle. The y-axis is collinear with the 2y axis; since
both axes are perpendicular to the incident beam, this diffractometer is classiﬁed as normal-beam geometry. The scattering plane is
deﬁned as the plane that contains the diffracted wave vector K and the incident wave vector K0, as well as their difference, the
scattering vector Q, as shown in Figure 2(b). The scattering plane is often horizontal for a laboratory-based X-ray diffractometer, so
that distortions due to gravity are minimized; at synchrotron sources the scattering plane is usually vertical, to take advantage of
the (typically) s-polarization of the radiation and the higher degree of collimation in the vertical plane.
Figure 2(a) shows the Eulerian four-circle diffractometer with all angles at their zero positions, in which case the direct beam
travels along the axis of the χ circle, deﬁning the zero position of y; the detector intercepts the direct beam, deﬁning the zero of 2y;
and the y and f axes are collinear, deﬁning the zero of χ. The zero of f is arbitrary. In the convention of this article, the sense of
rotation as shown in Figure 2(b) is left-handed for all axes except χ.
The origin of the rather inelegant naming system is historical. In Bragg's original derivation of X-ray diffraction, the incident and
exit X-ray beams both made an angle of y with the diffracting planes, for a total scattering angle of 2y. For normal-incidence
diffractometers, the scattering angle is set by a single rotation typically labeled 2y. The sample angle y is not necessarily equal to
one-half of 2y, except in the special case of some three-circle diffractometers where the axes are mechanically coupled with a 1:2
gear ratio. Thus, although Bragg's law is often written as l ¼ 2d siny, it is better written as
l ¼ 2d sinð2y=2Þ

½1

where l is the wavelength and d is the lattice-plane spacing. The angle between y and 2y is o, which is deﬁned as
o ¼ y  ð2y=2Þ

½2

The case of o ¼0 is called the symmetric mode of diffraction. Unfortunately, there is no standard notation even for the most
common type of diffractometer, and the y circle is sometimes labeled o.
Common angle scans performed on a four-circle Eulerian diffractometer include y and y/2y scans. A scan of the y-axis probes
the sample at a given magnitude of the scattering vector |Q| (deﬁned below in eqn [9]). As an example, a y scan might be used to
probe a sample's mosaic spread; one possible source of instrumental broadening for this scan would be the beam divergence. In
the y/2y scan, the 2y circle rotates at twice the rate of the y circle. The trajectory of the y/2y scan is radially outward from the origin

Author's personal copy
Multicircle Diffractometry Methods

3

Figure 1 Two examples of thin-ﬁlm diffraction data collected on a six-circle diffractometer. In both cases, the reciprocal lattice of the substrate
material is used as a reference. (a) Reciprocal-space map of a 12 nm ﬁlm of Ni grown on MgO(0 0 1). The map was made at L¼ 0.05 reciprocal
lattice units, with the incident beam set at a grazing angle of 0.21; the contours are spaced logarithmically. The sharp peak near the main MgO
(0 0 2) peak at H ¼2, K¼0 shows that the substrate is somewhat twinned. The peak marked A corresponds to a Ni(2 0 0) peak with relaxed cubeon-cube epitaxy. The peaks marked B, C, and C0 are Ni(1 1 1) peaks due to regions with the epitaxial relationship (1 1 0)Ni8(0 0 1)MgO. (b)
Truncation-rod data of ﬁve unit cells of SrTiO3 grown on Si(0 0 1), collected with a ﬁxed 0.31 angle of incidence. Circles indicate integrated
intensities along the (20L) rod, and diamonds represent the (31L) rod (vertically offset for clarity). Data points very close to the bulk Bragg points
(2 0 2), (3 1 1), and (3 1 3) were not measured, since they have very high intensities and no surface sensitivity.

Author's personal copy
4

Multicircle Diffractometry Methods

Figure 2 Diagram of a four-circle Eulerian diffractometer with (a) all angles at 01 and (b) all angles with positive displacements. The coordinate
system is shown in (a), while incident wave vector K0, diffracted wave vector K, scattering vector Q, and azimuthal angle c are shown in (b).

of reciprocal space (i.e., Q increases in magnitude, with constant direction). This two-angle scan might be used to measure
variations in a sample's lattice-parameter or strain; a source of instrumental broadening could be the radiation's band pass (i.e., the
spread in wavelength). A y/2y scan is preferable to a single-axis 2y scan because the reciprocal-space trajectory of a y/2y scan is
simpler to interpret. However, the power of modern multicircle diffractometry is to move to arbitrary positions and scan in
arbitrary directions of reciprocal space; the following sections of this article show how this is accomplished.

3
3.1

Angle Calculations
The Diffraction Equation

The fundamental problem in multicircle diffractometry is to map a sample's reciprocal-space coordinates to the diffractometer's
angles: to measure the scattered intensity at a certain point in reciprocal space, what values should the angles have? The solution to
this question was worked out by Busing and Levy for the case of a four-circle diffractometer, with extensions by many authors to
other geometries. Here, the principles for the ideal four-circle case are outlined; detailed calculations for a variety of geometries can
be found in the literature.
The question of mapping from reciprocal space to angle space could be restated as how to line up the scattering vector Q to a
desired reciprocal-lattice point h, that is,
h¼Q

½3

The two sides of eqn [3] must be written in the same reference frame and in the same coordinates; here one may choose to
transform eqn [3] to Å 1 units in the laboratory frame. Beginning with the left-hand side of eqn [3], the transformation of
reciprocal-lattice vector h from reciprocal-lattice coordinates (h, with no subscript) to lab coordinates (hl) is achieved in a number
of steps by successive application of a number of matrices. First, h in reciprocal-lattice units is transformed into Cartesian
coordinates (hc, in Å 1 units) via the matrix B:
hc ¼ Bh

½4

where B is constructed from the lattice parameters. The matrix B is most easily expressed as a combination of real-space lattice
parameters ai, ai, and reciprocal-space lattice parameters bi, bi (i ¼ 1–3):
0

b1
B0
B¼@
0

b2 cosb3
b2 sinb3
0

1
b3 cosb2
b3 sinb2 cosa1 C
A
2p=a3

½5

Author's personal copy
Multicircle Diffractometry Methods

5

where ai  bj ¼ 2pδij . Generally, B is not orthonormal, but the other matrices in this section are all orthonormal rotation matrices.
The next step is to transform hc into the coordinate system of the diffractometer's f axis:
hf ¼ Uhc

½6

where U describes the orientation of the crystal relative to the diffractometer, and as such, is known as the orientation matrix. The
determination of U is a critical step in multicircle diffractometry and is described in the next section. hf is then transformed into
laboratory coordinates by the successive application of the diffractometer-axes rotation matrices R:
h1 ¼ RðyÞRðχÞRðfÞhf

½7

where
0

cosy
B
RðyÞ ¼ @ siny

1
0
C
0A

1
1
0 sinχ
B
1
0 C
RðχÞ ¼ @ 0
A
sinχ 0 cosχ
0
1
cosf sinf 0
B
C
RðfÞ ¼ @ sinf cosf 0 A
0
0
1
0

0
cosχ

siny
cosy
0

½8

Turning to the right side of eqn [3], the scattering vector or momentum transfer, Q, is deﬁned as
Q ¼ K  K0

½9

where K and K0 are the diffracted and incident wave vectors, respectively. Their magnitudes are equal and deﬁned as
jKj ¼ jK 0 j ¼ K ¼ 2p=l

½10

The magnitude of Q is then
jQj ¼

2p
4psinð2y=2Þ
¼
d
l

½11

It should be noted that numerous conventions exist for the deﬁnitions of eqns [9] and [10]. For example, the symbols s and s0 or k0
and k have been used for the diffracted and incident wave vectors respectively. Furthermore, these wave vectors are often deﬁned
without the factor of 2p in eqn [10]; correspondingly, the factors of 2p are removed from eqns [5] and [11]. Other common
symbols for the scattering vector include G, H, and K.
In laboratory units, the incident wave vector is along the y-axis:
0

1
0
B C
K0 ¼ @ K A
0

½12

The diffracted wave vector is along the y-axis of the detector frame, which can be transformed into the lab frame with a rotation
matrix for the 2y axis:
1
0
B C
K ¼ Rð2yÞ@ K A;
0
0
1
cos2y sin2y 0
B
C
Rð2yÞ ¼ @ sin2y cos2y 0 A
0
0
1
0

½13

Author's personal copy
6

Multicircle Diffractometry Methods

The scattering vector Q, then, equals ½Rð2yÞ  I K0, where I is the identity matrix. Substitution into eqn [3] yields the basic
diffractometer equation for a four-circle diffractometer:
0

0

1

B C
RðyÞRðχÞRðfÞUBh ¼ ½Rð2yÞ  I@ K A
0

½14

Several possible generalizations of the above procedure are fairly straightforward to derive. For another diffractometer geometry, one simply incorporates the appropriate rotation matrices R into eqn [14]. One can also measure the directions of a
diffractometer's rotation axes with, for example, an autocollimator, creating empirical R matrices rather than the idealized ones of
eqns [8] and [13]. One also need not assume that the incident beam is perfectly collinear with the y-axis but can generalize the
beam's direction (eqn [12]). This can be very useful in situations where the incident beam is not level (e.g., deﬂected upwards by a
grazing-incidence mirror), but the entire diffractometer cannot be tilted. Several authors have worked out the equations for
completely general diffractometer geometries.

3.2

Determining the Orientation Matrix

With the diffraction equation (eqn [14]) otherwise solved, the orientation matrix U must be determined; B must also be found if
the sample's lattice parameters are not precisely known. Busing and Levy demonstrated several methods of determining U that
result in a 1D set of solutions in diffractometer-angle space. To uniquely determine U, a constraint must be added; selection of
constraints are discussed in the following section.
If the sample's lattice parameters are known, then two noncollinear orientation reﬂections, hl and h2, must be found to
determine U. Then, in principle, solving the following equations for h1 and h2 will determine U:
hif ¼ UBhi

½15

where i¼1,2 and the hif vectors are calculated from the observed angular positions of hi. But in practice, experimental uncertainties prevent one U matrix from exactly satisfying eqn [15] for both h1f and h2f. Errors can arise from effects such as mosaic
spread, refraction, beam divergence, or mechanical imperfections in the diffractometer. Therefore, the following procedure is
commonly used to determine U: h1f, called the primary reﬂection, exactly satisﬁes eqn [15], but h2f, as the secondary reﬂection,
only determines the rotation of the coordinate system about h1f. Exchanging h1 and h2 generally results in slightly different
solutions for U. Generally, to minimize the effect of angular misalignment and achieve a more accurate solution of U, the
orientation reﬂections should be at fairly high angles (high |Q|) and fairly far apart in angle (as a suggestion, the angle between h1
and h2 should be at least 401). On the other hand, when a good alignment is not easily maintained, one could select orientation
reﬂections that are close to each other and then probe only the nearby region of reciprocal space. Then, when another region is to
be probed, a new set of orientation reﬂections can be chosen in the new region.
When the sample's lattice parameters are not known, the matrix UB must be determined; sometimes the UB matrix, rather than
just U, is known as the orientation matrix. In the unknown lattice-parameter case, three non-coplanar reﬂections (h1, h2, h3) with
known (or assumed) Miller indices should be found that, with the selection of one constraint as discussed below, allows for a
unique solution of UB in eqn [15]. With four or more reﬂections, a least-squares ﬁtting method can be applied to eqn [15] to reﬁne
the lattice parameters. The resulting lattice parameters will not exactly reﬂect the symmetry of the crystal lattice but should be fairly
close. For example, with a cubic crystal, the unit cell lengths should be nearly equal, and the angles should be within a few tenths
of 901. With a sufﬁciently large set of orientation reﬂections hi, still other parameters can be reﬁned, such as a displacement of the
crystal from the diffractometer's center of rotation.

3.3

Operating Modes

As mentioned above, the calculation of diffractometer angles for a given reciprocal-lattice point is under-determined, since
reciprocal space is three-dimensional while a four-circle diffractometer has, obviously, four degrees of freedom. An additional
constraint is needed that is usually achieved by freezing one angle at a certain value. In the case of a four-circle normal-incidence
diffractometer, the detector angle 2y is determined by the magnitude of the scattering vector Q; a constraint cannot be placed on 2y
without restricting the range of accessible reciprocal space to a single magnitude of |Q|. Therefore, constraints in the four-circle
Eulerian geometry should be applied only to a diffractometer's sample angle or to an appropriately deﬁned azimuthal angle.
The simplest and perhaps most common four-circle mode is to constrain o (see eqn [2]) at a ﬁxed value. The constraint of o ¼0
is called the symmetric or bisecting mode, since the incident and diffracted beams make the same angle to the plane of the χ circle;
generally, this mode permits the greatest access to reciprocal space. Another mode based on sample angles is to constrain χ or f to
a ﬁxed value; such a mode might be useful when a sample environmental cell (e.g., oven, cryostat, or vacuum chamber) has a
small window that must be kept oriented to the incident beam, but is otherwise fairly limiting.

Author's personal copy
Multicircle Diffractometry Methods

7

Another operating mode is to choose a zone, a plane of reciprocal space passing through the origin, as the scattering plane. A
zone can be deﬁned by two non-collinear Bragg points; appropriate values of χ and f are then selected to place the two Bragg
points in the scattering plane. This mode contains two constraints, that is, it freezes two sample angles. Thus, access to reciprocal
space is reduced to a single plane, but data collection is simpliﬁed since the zone can be studied with movements of only 2y and y.
Instead of constraining a particular sample angle to a given value, one can also constrain the azimuthal rotation of the sample
about the scattering vector. As shown in Figure 2(b), c is the azimuthal rotation about Q. In deﬁning c, a reference vector N must
be chosen. N can point in any direction except that of Q, but is often a special direction for the sample, for example, the surface
normal, a magnetic ﬁeld direction, or the direction of polarization in a polar material. The deﬁnition of c ¼01 is when N lies in the
X–Y plane of Figure 2(a); c¼ 901 when N lies in the plane deﬁned by Q and the diffractometer's y/2y axes. The constrained-c mode
is particularly useful in surface diffraction when N is chosen to be the surface normal. Mochrie has shown how to calculate c for a
given incident angle or exit angle, which provide particularly convenient modes for grazing-incidence or grazing-exit studies. The
constraint of c ¼ 901 sets the incident angle, with respect to the plane normal to N, equal to the exit angle.

3.4

Equivalent Angle Settings

In addition to selection of an operating mode, other choices of angle must be made in the operation of a diffractometer. Although
any angle can theoretically be rotated by 3601 without changing anything, the axes of most diffractometers have limited ranges of
motion and cannot rotate indeﬁnitely. The diffractometer-control software must determine, for example, whether a rotation from
 170 to þ 1701 will be done with a motion of  20 or þ 3401. Furthermore, symmetry operations make some sets of angle
combinations equivalent. For example, for a given χ and f, the pair of angles (2y, o) are equivalent to (  2y, o  180), but both
settings may not be equally practical or accessible on a given diffractometer. In general, seven sets of angles can substitute for the
set of (2y, y, χ, f), although not all of these sets are compatible with all operating modes. A diffractometer-control program must,
implicitly or explicitly, select one of these sets. A convenient choice is to select angles that fall within the allowed range as set by
software limits.

4
4.1

Alternative Four-Circle Geometries
Kappa Geometry

Several types of four-circle diffractometer geometries exist in addition to the Eulerian geometry described above. Perhaps the most
common is the ‘kappa’ geometry, originally developed by Enraf–Nonius. As shown in Figure 3, the χ circle of the Eulerian geometry
is replaced by a κ-axis, which is built on an arm at an angle of a0 to the yκ axis; typically, a0 is nominally 501. The κ-axis rotates
another arm with another angle of a0, upon which sits the fκ-axis. The ‘κ’ subscripts on the yκ and fκ circles distinguish those
circles of the kappa diffractometer from similar y and f circles of a standard Eulerian diffractometer, although not all systems of
nomenclature make this explicit distinction. One could incorporate the rotation matrix of κ in deriving solutions to the diffraction
equation (eqn [14]). However, it is often more practical to simply relate the kappa angles (yκ, κ, fκ) to the Eulerian angles (y, χ, f):
y ¼ yκ  cosðκ=2Þ=cosðχ=2Þ
χ ¼ 2arcsin ½sinðκ=2Þ sina0 
f ¼ fκ  cosðκ=2Þ=cosðχ=2Þ

½16

The relations in eqn [16] are straightforward to include in the diffractometer-control software after an appropriate solution to
eqn [14] is computed in Eulerian geometry, with the advantage of allowing users to operate a kappa diffractometer just as if it were
the more familiar Eulerian diffractometer. In doing so, (y, χ, f) are termed ‘pseudoangles,’ whereas the physically present (yκ, κ, fκ)
are called ‘real’ angles.
The foremost advantage of a kappa-geometry diffractometer is the elimination of the χ circle. The primary weakness of Eulerian
geometry is the limited mechanical perfection of the χ circle; for example, any deviation from a perfect circle will increase the
sphere of confusion. This issue is often exacerbated for diffractometers with an open or split χ circle. On the other hand, a closed χ
circle blocks the incident or diffracted beam for some values of y; beam blockage is less of an issue with kappa geometry. A related
advantage is the relative compactness of the κ arm compared to the χ circle, making kappa geometry popular for conﬁned spaces or
crowded experimental stations. One potential drawback of the kappa geometry is its limited angular range. As seen in eqn [16], a
kappa diffractometer whose κ-axis has a full range of 71801 emulates an Eulerian diffractometer with a maximum theoretical
range of χ ¼ 72a0 (i.e., typically 71001). This issue can be dealt with by selection of a suitable angular setting, as discussed above,
and should not generally pose a problem. A practical caution is that the asymmetric shape of the kappa arm, as it folds and
unfolds, makes it particularly vulnerable to collisions with nearby objects (e.g., the incident-beam ﬂight path or the detector arm);
care should be taken to properly set hardware and software limits such that collisions cannot occur in any potential angular
conﬁguration.

Author's personal copy
8

Multicircle Diffractometry Methods

Figure 3 Diagram of a four-circle kappa diffractometer. The angles are chosen to hold a sample at the same place as the Eulerian diffractometer
shown in Figure 2(b), via the relations given in eqn [16].

4.2

Four-Circle General-Inclination Geometries

Another class of diffractometers, known as general-inclination geometries, is distinct from the normal-incidence geometries in that
it provides more than one degree of freedom to the detector. Such geometries can signiﬁcantly increase the range of accessible
reciprocal space in situations where the angular range is limited by a sample cell. In contrast to the normal-incidence geometry, the
scattering plane (containing K, K0, and Q) of the general-inclination geometry is no longer ﬁxed; there is no simple one-to-one
correspondence between the general-inclination and normal-incidence geometries such as that which exists between the Eulerian
and kappa geometries. Since the position of the detector in a general-inclination geometry is a compound motion of several
angles, the total scattering angle 2y must be calculated from those angles and cannot simply be read from one dial on the
instrument. In this article, the convention that 2y is the total scattering angle is followed. As such, only the normal-incidence
geometry has a single circle that can be properly labeled 2y, although many systems of nomenclature use 2y as the label for one of
the detector circles.
Several variations of four-circle inclined-geometry diffractometers have been developed, two of which are illustrated in Figure 4.
For the ‘Z-axis’ diffractometer (Figure 4(a)), the sample sits on the Z-axis and the detector on the δ and g-axes; all three axes then
rotate about the a-axis. It may be noted that many Z-axis diffractometers call the sample axis y (or o); here, this axis is labeled as Z
to emphasize that it is not equivalent to the Eulerian y-axis, since the Z-axis is not orthogonal to the X-ray beam when aa0. The Zaxis geometry is particularly useful in holding heavy sample equipment such as vacuum chambers, as it minimizes motions that
must be coupled through the sample chamber. The total scattering angle 2y is given by
2yZaxis ¼ arccosðcosg cosδ cosa þ sina singÞ

½17

Another example of inclined geometry is the ‘S2D2’ diffractometer. As shown in Figure 4(b), the S2D2 geometry is composed
of two pairs of orthogonal axes: the sample rotates on Z and m, while the detector rotates on δ and ν. Indeed, the name ‘S2D2’
is meant to indicate that this geometry has two degrees of freedom for the sample (‘S2’) and two degrees of freedom for the
detector (‘D2’). In this nomenclature, the normal-incidence four-circle Eulerian and kappa diffractometers both have ‘S3D1’
geometry. The Z-axis geometry does not exactly ﬁt into this naming system, since one degree of freedom is shared between the
sample and detector, but the designation (S1D2)1 has been used, indicating that a Z-axis diffractometer is an S1D2 (three-circle)
diffractometer mounted upon a fourth circle. A practical advantage of the S2D2 geometry is the mechanical decoupling of
the sample and detector motions, limiting the propagation of mechanical errors. The scattering angle of the S2D2 diffractometer is

Author's personal copy
Multicircle Diffractometry Methods

9

Figure 4 Two examples of general-inclination four-circle diffractometers: (a) Z-axis geometry, and (b) S2D2 geometry.

given by eqn [17] with g set to zero:
2yS2D2 ¼ arccosðcosν cosδÞ

½18

The orientation matrix U of a four-circle inclined geometry can be calculated in the same way as for the four-circle normalincidence geometry case, and a mode with one constraint must be selected. The diffraction equations are similar to the normalincidence case, but the appropriate rotation matrices for the sample and detector axes must be incorporated on both sides
of eqn [14].
The Z-axis and S2D2 geometries are particularly useful for surface scattering when the surface normal is aligned parallel to the
Z-axis, since the angle of incidence is given simply by the diffractometer angle a or m, respectively. However, sufﬁciently precise
sample alignment is often not easy, especially in a vacuum environment, which leads naturally to the desire for additional degrees
of freedom for the sample. Such diffractometer geometries are described in the next section.

5

Five-Circle and Six-Circle Diffractometers

Representing the next level of complexity and ﬂexibility, ﬁve- and six-circle diffractometer geometries all fall into the class of
inclined geometries. In general, such diffractometers have been developed to provide better access to larger ranges of reciprocal
space or to provide greater ﬂexibility in sample positioning, given the constraints of a particular experiment.
Several varieties of ﬁve- and six-circle diffractometers have been constructed. The basic ﬁve-circle diffractometer could be
characterized as a four-circle normal-incidence diffractometer (either Eulerian or kappa) with the y-axis horizontal, mounted on a
ﬁfth rotation stage whose axis is vertical. The sample and detector motions are coupled by the ﬁfth circle, so this ﬁve-circle
geometry could be labeled (S3D1)1. This ﬁve-circle diffractometer can be converted into a six-circle instrument by the addition of
another vertical axis, upon which sit the sample circles (y, χ, and f); the entire diffractometer rotates on the bottommost axis.
Alternatively, one could add the χ and f circles of a Eulerian cradle (or the κ and fκ circles of a kappa arm) to an S2D2
diffractometer (Figure 4(b)); this geometry decouples the sample and detector motions and would thus be labeled S4D2. Another
six-circle geometry is formed by adding a Eulerian cradle to a Z-axis diffractometer (Figure 4(a)); the sample and detector motions
of this geometry are coupled through the a-axis.

Author's personal copy
10

Multicircle Diffractometry Methods

While the additional degrees of freedom in ﬁve- and six-circle diffractometers provide much greater ﬂexibility in operation, the
degree of complexity in operation increases correspondingly. On a practical level, ﬁve- and six-circle diffractometers are generally
quite large, needing more (and heavier) counterweights than four-circle diffractometers. The large size and extra degrees of
freedom increase the possibility of collisions and the damage that a collision can cause; hardware and software limits must be
carefully set to avoid a collision in any potential angular conﬁguration. More fundamentally, the choice of a mode becomes more
complicated. Each additional degree of freedom (rotation axis) requires an additional constraint in the transformation between
angle space and reciprocal space. Speciﬁcally, to uniquely determine the angle settings for a reciprocal lattice point, a ﬁve-circle or
six-circle diffractometer requires, respectively, two or three constraints. The number of possible operating modes becomes correspondingly larger, and the geometry calculations supported by the diffractometer-control software also grow in complexity.
Although the modes of a ﬁve- or six-circle diffractometer require selection of several constraints, the constraints cannot be chosen
arbitrarily. For example, one cannot constrain two detector circles, since that would limit reciprocal-space access to a single
magnitude of |Q|. In the case of surface diffraction, one could not choose both the incident angle and the exit angle since that would
overconstrain the azimuthal angle (the incident and exit angles can be chosen to be equal for a given Q but a speciﬁc value for both
cannot be selected). In the particular case of S4D2 geometry, a system was developed by You to organize mode selection by
categorizing the angles which could be subject to constraints. The three categories of angles are detector, azimuthal, and sample. A
detector constraint would ﬁx one of the angles upon which the detector rotates, or would ﬁx the angle of Q or reference vector N
with respect to the Y–Z plane deﬁned in Figure 2(a); for example, Q or N could be ﬁxed to lie in the horizontal or vertical plane.
Azimuthal constraints include ﬁxing the incident or exit angle, or otherwise ﬁxing the azimuthal angle c. Possible sample constraints include ﬁxing a sample angle at a certain value or constraining it relative to another angle. The key to this method is that no
more than one constraint may be placed on either detector angles or azimuthal angles; the remaining constraint(s) must be applied
to sample angles. Both sets of data in Figure 1, for example, were collected on an S4D2 diffractometer with one detector constraint
(ﬁxed angle of N), one azimuthal constraint (ﬁxed angle of incidence), and one sample constraint (Z was ﬁxed to be half of δ). One
could also select one detector or azimuthal constraint and two sample constraints, or one could select three sample constraints.
The development of ﬁve- and six-circle diffractometers was driven by the need for ﬂexibility in diffractometer operation,
especially for access to the widest possible range of reciprocal space, given the experimental constraints. While some future
advances in this technique may lie in the area of new diffractometer geometries, many recent efforts have focused upon
improvements in data-collection efﬁciency. Parallel data collection has become common with the use of 1D and 2D detectors. As
such, detector motion can be completely uncoupled from sample motion, either by ﬁxing large 2D detectors behind the sample or
by positioning detectors via robotic control. This is particularly important for applications of micro- and nano-diffraction;
stringent requirements for positional stability make it difﬁcult to rotate the sample in such measurements, so ﬂexibility in detector
positioning becomes essential for accessing wide areas of reciprocal space. Advances in detector electronics have led to increases in
the maximum count rates that detectors can handle, in both counting and integrating modes. In a similar vein, use of widebandpass monochromators or even ‘pink’ beam (i.e., radiation whose spectrum is continuous up to a certain limit) is becoming
common for improving count rates in measurements which suffer from low scattering strength yet can handle the reduced
resolution, for example, diffuse-scattering measurements. Such advances will continue to improve the efﬁciency and efﬁcacy of
multicircle diffractometry as an important research method.

Acknowledgments
Data in Figure 1 were collected at the Advanced Photon Source beamline 7ID, in collaboration with R Clarke and C Cionca
(Figure 1(a)), and MJ Bedzyk and DM Goodner (Figure 1(b)). This research used resources of the Advanced Photon Source, a U.S.
Department of Energy (DOE) Ofﬁce of Science User Facility operated for the DOE Ofﬁce of Science by Argonne National
Laboratory under Contract no. DE-AC02–06CH11357.

Further Reading
Arndt, U.W., Willis, B.T.M., 1966. Single Crystal Diffractometry. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Bloch, J.M., 1985. Angle and index calculations for a ‘z-axis’ x-ray diffractometer. Journal of Applied Crystallography 18, 33–36.
Busing, W.R., Levy, H.A., 1967. Angle calculations for 3- and 4-circle x-ray and neutron diffractometers. Acta Crystallographica 22, 457–464.
Evans-Lutterodt, K.W., Tang, M.-T., 1995. Angle calculations for a ‘2 þ 2’ surface x-ray diffractometer. Journal of Applied Crystallography 28, 318–326.
Hamilton, W.C., 1989. Angle settings for four-circle diffractometers. In: Ibers, J.A., Hamilton, W.C. (Eds.), International Tables for X-Ray Crystallography, vol. 4. Dordrecht:
Kluwer Academic. pp. 274−284.
Lohmeier, M., Vlieg, E., 1993. Angle calculations for a six-circle x-ray diffractometer. Journal of Applied Crystallography 26, 706–716.
Mochrie, S.G.J., 1988. Four-circle angle calculations for surface diffraction. Journal of Applied Crystallography 21, 1–3.
Sands, D.E., 1982. Vectors and Tensors in Crystallography. Mineola: Dover Publications.
Vlieg, E., Van der Veen, J.F., Macdonald, J.E., Miller, M., 1987. Angle calculations for ﬁve-circle diffractometer used for surface x-ray diffraction. Journal of Applied
Crystallography 20, 330–337.
You, H., 1999. Angle calculations for a ‘4S þ 2D’ six-circle diffractometer. Journal of Applied Crystallography 32, 614–623.

