Data Collection
Diffraction Geometry – The Reciprocal Lattice
An ideal crystal is composed of molecules arranged on
a regular three dimensional lattice. The unit cell
describes the basic building block for this lattice, and is
characterised by the lengths of its three edges (a,b,c) and
the angles between them (α,β,γ).
Definition: A lattice is an infinite arrangement of
points in space where the environment of any point is
identical to the environment of all other points.
This lattice (the real space lattice) is easily visualised in
terms of the physical arrangement of molecules in the
crystal. Indeed, it can often be seen directly by electron
microscopy of a suitably thin crystal.
The reciprocal lattice is defined in the same way by the
reciprocal unit cell, with axes a*, b*, c* (and interaxial
angles α*,β*,γ*) by the following vector relationships:
a* = b^c
a.b^c

b* = c^a
a.b^c

c* = a^b
a.b^c

Where “^ “ denotes a vector cross product and “.”
denotes a vector dot product.
Thus a* is normal to the axes b and c, and has a
magnitude inversely proportional to the magnitude of a.

In an orthogonal system (α=β=γ=90o) this simplifies to
a* = 1 i
a

b* = 1 j

c* = 1 k
b

c

where i, j k are unit vectors along the a, b, c axes.
The co-ordinates of the reciprocal lattice points are hkl
where h,k and l are integers. Thus h is the number of
reciprocal lattice points along the a* direction, k along b*
and l along c*.
The reciprocal lattice has no obvious physical
significance, but is extremely valuable in visualising
diffraction geometry when used in conjunction with the
Ewald sphere construction.

The Ewald Sphere Construction
The Ewald sphere is centred on a line representing the Xray beam direction, with a radius of 1/λ. The crystal
position is at the centre of the Ewald sphere. The
reciprocal lattice has its origin at the point where the Xray beam exits the Ewald sphere. Rotation of the crystal
(sitting at the centre of the sphere) results in an identical
rotation of the reciprocal lattice about its origin.
Diffraction from a set of planes with Miller indices hkl
will occur when the corresponding reciprocal lattice
point (hkl) lies exactly on the Ewald sphere.
(The way that the reciprocal lattice is defined means that
the vector from the origin to the reciprocal lattice point
hkl (d*) will be normal to the planes with Miller indices
hkl and will have a magnitude 1/d, where d is the
interplanar spacing. This is left as an exercise for the
student.)

Effects of crystal mosaicity, wavelength dispersion
and beam divergence.
In practice, because a real crystal is made up of many
small mosaic blocks with a small spread in orientations, a
reciprocal lattice point for the crystal will not be a true
point, but a small spherical cap. In the extreme case of a
powder, each reciprocal lattice point becomes a spherical
shell.
Equally, because of wavelength dispersion, the Ewald
sphere has a finite thickness. Beam divergence will also
increase the effective thickness of the Ewald sphere.
As a consequence, particularly for macromolecular
crystals which have relatively large unit cells (and thus
closely spaced reciprocal lattice points), a number of
planes will be in a diffracting position even for a
stationary crystal.
However, in order to bring all planes into a diffracting
condition (in a monochromatic experiment) the crystal
must be rotated. As the crystal rotates, the reciprocal
lattice also rotates about its own origin, and a succession
of reciprocal lattice points will pass through the Ewald
sphere.

The Ewald sphere construction explains the
appearance of diffraction patterns.
If the X-ray beam is along a principal zone axis
direction, it will be normal to a set of densely populated
reciprocal lattice planes. These planes will intersect the
Ewald sphere in a set of concentric circles, centred on the
direct beam position.
Thus all reciprocal lattice points in a diffracting
condition will also lie on this set of concentric circles.
The distance between the circles is a function of the
spacing of the reciprocal lattice planes along the X-ray
beam direction.
If the crystal is rotated through a small angle, each of
these circles will be drawn out into a lune. Within the
lune, the spot separation will be determined by the
reciprocal lattice spacings within the planes.
A very mosaic crystal (or a large beam divergence) has
an effect on the diffraction pattern that is very similar to
rotation of the crystal. Instead of circles of spots on a
“still” image (no crystal rotation), lunes of spots will be
seen.
If a principal zone axis is precessed about the X-ray
beam direction, with the detector following the same
precessive motion, then an undistorted projection of the
reciprocal lattice can be recorded (a precession
photograph) from which the lattice parameters can be
measured directly.

Symmetry of the reciprocal lattice
The symmetry of the reciprocal lattice follows the
symmetry of the real space lattice. This symmetry
extends beyond the geometric arrangement of the
reciprocal lattice points themselves, and includes the
diffracted intensities associated with each r.l.p. In
addition, in the absence of anomalous scattering, the
diffracted intensities obey Friedel’s Law:
I(hkl) = I(-h,-k,-l)
Thus the reciprocal lattice has a centre of symmetry
(which in general is not true for the real space lattice).
In the absence of crystal symmetry, a 180o rotation of
the crystal is required to measure (nearly…see below) all
the unique data. Because of Friedel’s law, this will result
in a multiplicity of two. However, in the presence of
symmetry, a data collection strategy can be employed
which requires a smaller rotation to measure all the
unique data. For example, if the crystal belongs to the
Laue group 422, and is rotated around the four-fold axis
during data collection, then only a 45o rotation is
required (but it must be the correct 45o). A monclinic
crystal requires a 180o rotation if rotated around the
unique b axis, but only 90o if rotated around the a or c
axes.
The required rotation depends on both the crystal
orientation and the Laue group. Programs are available to
help design a suitable strategy.

The “cusp” data
Reciprocal lattice points lying very close to the rotation
axis will never pass through the Ewald sphere. If the
crystal is aligned with its symmetry axis exactly along
the rotation axis, or if there is no symmetry (spacegroup
P1), these data will not be recorded even if a full 360o
rotation is used. To record these “cusp” data, the crystal
must be rotated around a second axis (preferably
orthogonal to the first). This is always necessary for
triclinic data. For other symmetries, the missing data can
be avoided by offsetting the symmetry axis from the
rotation axis; in this case a reflection that lies in the cusp
volume will have a symmetry mate that will pass through
the Ewald sphere. The volume of the cusp region
depends on the resolution and the wavelength. For
wavelengths of 1Å or less, and 2.5Å resolution (or
lower), the percentage of data that is lost is negligably
small.

Data Collection
Although in principle there are many ways in which the
required volume of reciprocal space can be covered (eg
precession photography), in practice this is always
achieved by a simple rotation of the crystal about a single
axis (the rotation or oscillation method).
In some experimental designs the crystal is placed on a
multiple axis goniostat, allowing it to be oriented in a
particular way (for example, with a symmetry axis
parallel to the rotation axis). In the majority of cases,
however, a single axis goniostat is all that is required.
As discussed earlier, the crystal orientation and crystal
symmetry (Laue group) determine the total rotation
range required. This range is covered by a series of
sequential rotations. There are several factors which
influence the choice of oscillation (rotation) angle for
each image. A large oscillation angle minimises the
number of images that need to be collected, and therefore
the “dead time” while each image is read out and written
to disk. However the angle must not be so large that
spots on adjacent lunes overlap on the detector. A large
oscillation angle also has the disadvantage that it
increases the X-ray background on the image, which
degrades the signal to noise, especially for the weak,
high resolution data.
Coarse phi-slicing corresponds to the situation when the
oscillation angle is comparable to or greater than the
width (in phi) of a typical reflection. If the image width

is a fraction of the reflection width, this is referred to as
fine phi-slicing.
Data Processing
Data processing falls naturally into three quite distinct
steps:
i. Determination of crystal cell parameters, space
group and orientation.
ii. Integration of the images (with concurrent
refinement of crystal, beam and detector
parameters).
iii.
Data reduction, that is placing all data on a
common scale, merging multiple observations to
give a unique dataset while rejecting outliers and
reducing intensities to amplitudes for use in heavy
atom phasing, Fourier syntheses, model refinement
etc.

Autoindexing
Autoindexing uses the positions of spots on one of more
images to determine the crystal lattice parameters and its
orientation. The most successful algorithms are based on
an FFT approach.
It is important to realise that it is NOT possible to
determine the space group symmetry from the
autoindexing alone, as it only makes use of spot

positions. Spot intensities are required to detect the
presence of symmetry.
Definition of crystal orientation
The crystal orientation can be defined as
X = ΦU B h
where
X is a vector in the laboratory frame giving the
position of the reciprocal lattice vector with indices
h
B is an orthogonalisation matrix, which defines a set
of orthogonal axes based on the crystal axes. This
matrix depends only on the crystal cell parameters.
Uis a pure rotation matrix describing the orientation of
the crystal in the laboratory frame in the initial or
standard setting.
Φ is the rotation around the spindle axis for a single
axis device, or more generally the goniostat matrix.
For convenience, the product of the U and B matrices is
often denoted as the "setting matrix" A
A = UB
The orthogonalisation matrix B in the general case is
given by
⎛ a * b *Cos α * c * Cos β *
⎞
⎜ o b * Sin α * − c *Sin β * Cos α ⎟
⎜
⎟
⎝o o
c * Sin β * Sin α ⎠

which as mentioned earlier depends only on the crystal
cell parameters.

Parameter refinement
Once an orientation matrix and cell parameters have been
derived from the auto-indexing, these parameters (and
others) are refined further using a different algorithm.
The parameters to be refined can be conveniently
grouped into three classes:
a) Crystal parameters: cell parameters, crystal
orientation and mosaic spread (isotropic or
anisotropic).
b) Detector parameters: the detector position and
orientation and (if appropriate) distortion
parameters (e.g. the radial and tangential offsets for
the Mar image plate scanner).
c) Beam parameters: the orientation of the primary
beam and beam divergence (isotropic or
anisotropic).
The refinement of these parameters is achieved by leastsquares minimisation of two residuals; a positional
residual:
−
Ω1 = ∑ ω ix (Xcalc
i
i

Xobs
i

2
) +

(

ω iy Ycalc
− Yobs
i
i

)

2

where X and Y are the spot co-ordinates on the detector,
and an angular residual:

−
Ω2 = ∑ ω i [(R calc
i
i

) ]

R obs
/d*i
i

2

where Ricalc, Riobs are the calculated and observed
distances of the reciprocal lattice point di* from the
centre of the Ewald sphere (see figure 2). Riobs is
obtained from the phi centroid if fine phi slices have
been used. For coarse phi slices, the reciprocal lattice
point is either assumed to lie exactly on the Ewald sphere
at the midpoint of the rotation, or for partially recorded
reflections its position is estimated from the degree of
partiality of the reflection (i.e. the way in which the total
intensity is distributed between the two abutting images).
This latter approach, known as post-refinement because
it requires a knowledge of the integrated intensities,
requires a model for the rocking curve, and permits
refinement of either crystal mosaicity or beam
divergence. For fine phi slices the mosaic spread or beam
divergence is estimated from the observed reflection
width in phi.
The refinement strategy can depend on how the data has
been collected. If fine phi slices have been used,
accurate phi centroids and co-ordinates (X,Y) are
available for most strong reflections (excluding those
very close to the rotation axis) and both residuals (Ω1,
Ω2) can be minimised simultaneously using a suitable
selection of reflections (strong and evenly distributed
over the detector and in phi). Problems arising due to

correlations of different parameters can be avoided either
by fixing some parameters or by the use of eigen-value
filtering. These problems can be particularly serious for
low resolution data, where there is a strong correlation
between crystal to detector distance and the cell
parameters, or for an offset detector where there is a high
correlation between the detector swing angle and the
(horizontal) primary beam co-ordinate. If only a narrow
phi range of reflections is used in the refinement then
some unit cell parameters will be poorly defined and may
be correlated with the crystal setting angles, and there
will also be a strong correlation between the detector
orientation around the X-ray beam and the crystal setting
angle around the beam. In such circumstances the
refined parameters may assume physically unrealistic
values, but this will not necessarily impair the accuracy
of the prediction of reflection positions and widths.
When the data is collected with coarse phi slices, only
fully recorded reflections will give accurate spot
positions (X,Y), and accurate phi centroids can only be
determined for partially recorded reflections. In some
the two residuals are therefore minimised independently.
Only the detector parameters are refined when
minimising the positional residual, and only cell
orientation and optionally beam parameters are refined
against the angular residual. This approach does have
the advantage that the accuracy of the refined cell
parameters does not depend on the accuracy of the

crystal to detector distance or direct beam position,
providing these are known sufficiently well to allow
correct indexing of the reflections.

Integration of the Images
Predict the position in the digitised image of each Bragg
reflection.
Estimating its intensity (after subtracting the X-ray
background) and an error estimate of the intensity.
Predicting reflection positions
Prediction of spot positions on a "virtual detector"
Map onto the digitised image allowing for spatial
distortions.
Defining the peak/background mask
The background can only be measured in a region around
the spot either in two dimensions (X, Y, the detector coordinates) for coarse phi-slices or in 3 dimensions (X, Y
and phi) for fine phi slices.
Require definition of a peak/background mask.
Errors in the mask definition will give systematic errors
in intensities.

Summation integration and Profile Fitting
Summation integration:
Sum the pixel values of all pixels in the peak area of the
mask, and then subtract the sum of the background
values calculated from the background plane for the
same pixels.
Profile fitting:
Assume that the shape or profile (in 2 or 3 dimensions)
of the spots is known.
Determine the scale factor which, when applied to the
known spot profile, gives the best fit to be observed spot
profile. This scale factor is then proportional to the
profile fitted intensity for the reflection.
R=

∑ W (X − KP )
peak
pixels

2

i

i

i

Xi is the background subtracted intensity at pixel i
Pi is the value of the standard profile at the
corresponding pixel
Wi is a weight, derived from the expected variance of
Xi
K is the scale factor to be determined
Determining the "Standard" Profile
These are determined for different areas on the detector.
A weighted mean is used to evaluate any individual
reflection.

Precautions must be taken to avoid introducing
systematic errors because of errors in the “standard”
profiles.

Standard Deviation Estimates

For summation integration, a standard deviation can be
obtained based on Poisson statistics.
For profile fitted intensities the goodness of fit of the
scaled standard profile to the true reflection profile can
be used.
These will generally underestimate the true errors, and
should be modified accordingly.

Scaling

Apply polarisation and Lorentz factor corrections.
The intensities from different images then need to be put
on a common scale. This allows for variations in source
intensity (eg beam decay at a synchrotron), variations in
diffracting volume, radiation damage and, to some
extent, absorption corrections.
Apply a scale factor K and temperature factor B to each
image, and these parameters are refined to minimise the
residual
R = ∑ ∑ W (I − I
h

i

hi

hi

h

K )2
hi

where:
Ihi is the ith measurement of reflection h
whi is the weight for that observation (the inverse of the
variance)
I

h

is the weighted mean intensity for reflection h

Khi = Kj exp (-2BjSin2 h/ 2)
Kj and Bj are the scale and temperature factors for image
j on which Ihi was measured.
h is the Bragg angle for reflection h
is the radiation wavelength

Success depends on the presence of multiple (symmetry
related) observations on different images.
Merging data

Multiple observations are reduced to a weighted mean
intensity and standard deviation.
"Rogue" observations or outliers detected and rejected.
Statistics on the agreement between multiple
observations, data completeness, evidence for systematic
errors such as partial bias (which arise from errors in
modelling the reflection width) are also calculated at this
stage.

Modifying Standard Deviations.

The level of agreement between multiple observations
can be used to modify the standard deviations of the
intensities. Providing the multiplicity is high, then

I

hi

− I
⎛
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎝

σI

hi

h
⎞
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎠

where:
Ihi, (Ihi) are the intensity and standard deviation of the
ith observation of reflection h
is the weighted mean intensity.
h
should equal unity when averaged over a significant
number of reflections.
I

Standard deviations are modified to give
(Ihi) = A σ2 ⎛⎝ I ⎞⎠ + BI 2
hi
hi
where the values of the parameters A and B are chosen to
get a standard deviation ratio of unity for all intensity
ranges.

Reducing Intensities to Amplitudes

The simplest way to determine the structure factor
amplitudes (F) from the observed intensities (I) is simply
F= I
However this cannot be applied to observations for
which the observed intensity is negative (statistically, a
certain percentage of the data will be expected to have
negative intensities). To overcome this problem, French
and Wilson have applied Baysian statistics, making use
of the prior knowledge that the true intensity must be
greater than zero, and the distribution of intensities
obeys Wilson statistics, to derive the most likely
(positive) intensity for those reflections with an observed
negative intensity.
