Reciprocal lattice
This lecture will introduce the concept of a ‘reciprocal lattice’, which is a formalism that takes into
account the regularity of a crystal lattice introduces redundancy when viewed in real space, because
each unit cell contains the same information. There are two concepts you might have seen from earlier
courses that we will touch on:
•

•

A periodic structure is most naturally described by its Fourier transform (e.g. if you have a
function which is a sine wave in the time domain, 𝑓(𝑥) = sin(𝜔𝑡), the essential information
about this function is captured by its frequency 𝜔)
Light is diffracted by a periodic structure, and this can be described by Bragg’s law: 2𝑑𝑠𝑖𝑛𝜃 =
𝑛𝜆, where 𝜆 is a wavelength, n is an integer, and d is the period of the periodic structure. This
equation applies equally to a diffraction grating (typically using visible light) or to a crystalline
solid (typically using x-ray light)

Definition of reciprocal lattice vectors
The primitive translation vectors 𝒂𝟏 , 𝒂𝟐 , 𝒂𝟑 represent the direct lattice.
The reciprocal lattice vectors, 𝒃𝟏 , 𝒃𝟐 , 𝒃𝟑 , are defined as follows:

•
•

•
•

𝒃𝟏 = 2𝜋

𝒂𝟐 × 𝒂𝟑
𝒂𝟏 ∙ 𝒂𝟐 × 𝒂𝟑

𝒃𝟐 = 2𝜋

𝒂𝟑 × 𝒂𝟏
𝒂𝟏 ∙ 𝒂𝟐 × 𝒂𝟑

𝒃𝟑 = 2𝜋

𝒂𝟏 × 𝒂𝟐
𝒂𝟏 ∙ 𝒂𝟐 × 𝒂𝟑

The denominator of all three is a scalar which gives the volume of the primitive cell: 𝑉𝑐 = |𝒂𝟏 ∙
𝒂𝟐 × 𝒂𝟑 |
If a primitive lattice vector is mutually orthogonal to the other two, its reciprocal lattice vector
will point in the same direction. If all three primitive lattice vectors of the direct lattice are
mutually orthogonal, the reciprocal lattice vectors will all point in the same direction as the
direct lattice vectors.
if 𝒂𝒊 ∙ 𝐚𝐣 = 𝛿𝒊,𝒋 for both values of j, 𝒂𝒊 ||𝒃𝒊
If primitive lattice vectors are all mutually orthogonal, the reciprocal lattice vectors point in the
same direction at the direct lattice vectors but have a magnitude 2𝜋/|𝒂𝒊 |
Generalization of the previous two statements: 𝒃𝒊 ∙ 𝒂𝒋 = 2𝜋𝛿𝑖,𝑗 where 𝛿𝑖,𝑗 = 1 if i=j and 𝛿𝑖,𝑗 = 0
if 𝑖 ≠ 𝑗

Example: orthorhombic lattice system
An orthorhombic lattice is comprised of rectangular prism cells with all edges of unequal length. The
direct lattice vectors are:
̂
𝒂𝟏 = 𝑎𝒙

̂
𝒂𝟐 = 𝑏𝒚
𝒂𝟑 = 𝑐𝒛̂
Where 𝑎 ≠ 𝑏 ≠ 𝑐
•
•
•
•

𝒂𝟏 ∙ 𝒂𝟐 × 𝒂𝟑 = 𝑎𝑏𝑐
̂
𝒂𝟐 × 𝒂𝟑 = 𝑏𝑐𝒙
̂
𝒂𝟑 × 𝒂𝟏 = 𝑎𝑐𝒚
𝒂𝟏 × 𝒂𝟐 = 𝑎𝑏𝒛̂
𝒃𝟏 =

2𝜋
̂
𝒙
𝑎

𝒃𝟐 =

2𝜋
̂
𝒚
𝑏

𝒃𝟑 =

2𝜋
𝒛̂
𝑐

For cubic, tetragonal, and orthorhombic primitive lattices, reciprocal lattice vectors are straightforward
to compute—they are in the same direction as the corresponding direct lattice vector with a magnitude
given by 2𝜋/|𝒂𝒊 |. This is not true for crystal lattice systems in which the primitive lattices are not
mutually orthogonal. When in doubt, just calculate using the full equations from earlier.
The reciprocal lattice is also a lattice (and if the direct lattice is primitive, then so is the reciprocal), and
points in reciprocal space are mapped out by the set of vectors:
𝑮 = 𝜈1 𝒃𝟏 + 𝜈2 𝒃𝟐 + 𝜈3 𝒃𝟑
Where 𝜈1 , 𝜈2 , 𝜈3 are integers
Students often wonder whether a reciprocal lattice is a ‘real’ object
or a conceptual object. While reciprocal lattices might not be
encountered in everyday life, many experiments for measuring the
structure of materials indeed measure the reciprocal lattice not the
direct lattice (analogy: when you listen to music, each note is
distinguished by its frequency).
The image to the left shows neutron scattering measurements on a
ferroelectric material, where the yellow dots indicate regions of
maximal signal. In data like these, (h,k,l) correspond to the x,y,z
directions in reciprocal space (l is fixed to be zero for this image),
and the units are such that the reciprocal lattice vectors have unit
length. The bright dots on the grid of integers is precisely what you
Figure 1. Image source:
https://www.nature.com/articles/s41563- would expect from the equation for G above. For an ideal crystal,
018-0112-7
these bright dots would only be broadened by instrument
resolution and temperature, but the additional structure in this
image (e.g. diagonal streaks) indicates deviations from perfect crystallinity, which this paper explores.

Reciprocal lattice and fourier series
Now that we know what the reciprocal lattice vectors are, lets get some physical intuition behind them.
A crystal is composed of infinitely repeating unit cells (unit cell = basis of one or more atoms attached to
a lattice point). A crystal is invariant under translation of the form 𝑻 = 𝑢1 𝒂𝟏 + 𝑢2 𝒂𝟐 + 𝑢3 𝒂𝟑 where
𝑢1 , 𝑢2 , 𝑢3 are integers and 𝒂𝟏 , 𝒂𝟐 , 𝒂𝟑 are the lattice vectors. This is another way of saying that every
unit cell is identical to every other unit cell.
When we think of a periodic structure, whether it be a sine wave, a square wave, or some other more
complicated shape which repeats with period a, we should immediately think of a fourier transform or a
fourier series.
Let’s consider the lattice (no basis), which mathematically is represented by a series of delta functions.
Only consider a one dimensional lattice at first, with spacing a between lattice points.

This structure can be written as: 𝐿(𝑥) = ∑𝑢1 𝛿(𝑥 − 𝑢1 𝑎) , where u1 is an integer
The Fourier transform of this is given by:
∞

𝑅(𝑞) = ∫ 𝑒 𝑖𝑞𝑥 𝐿(𝑥)𝑑𝑥
−∞
∞

= ∑ ∫ 𝑒 𝑖𝑞𝑥 𝛿(𝑥 − 𝑢1 𝑎)𝑑𝑥
𝑢1

−∞
∞

Aside: generally, the FT of a delta function is given by ∫− ∞ 𝑒 𝑖𝑞𝑥 𝛿(𝑥 − 𝑥0 )𝑑𝑥 = 𝑒 𝑖𝑞𝑥0
Also, the FT is often expressed with a factor of 2pi in the exponent, but we will account for that later
= ∑ 𝑒 𝑖𝑞𝑢1 𝑎 = ∑ cos(𝑞𝑢1 𝑎) + 𝑖𝑠𝑖𝑛(𝑞𝑢1 𝑎)
𝑢1

𝑢1

Simplification: we only need to keep the cosine term because the sum goes over positive and negative
values of u1 and sin(−𝑥) = −sin (𝑥)
𝑅(𝑞) = ∑ cos(𝑞𝑢1 𝑎)
𝑢1

For arbitrary values of q, this sum will tend to zero as the number of terms goes to infinity. This can only
be avoided if specific values of q are chosen:

𝑞 = integer ×

2𝜋
𝑎

This gives a 1 dimensional lattice with points separated by 2𝜋/𝑎. This is the reciprocal lattice.

This can be generalized to three dimensions:
⃑)=
𝐿(𝒓

∑ 𝛿(𝒓 − (𝑢1 𝒂𝟏 + 𝑢2 𝒂𝟐 + 𝑢3 𝒂𝟑 ))
𝑢1 ,𝑢2 ,𝑢3

Where 𝑢1 , 𝑢2 , 𝑢3 are integers and 𝒂𝟏 , 𝒂𝟐 , 𝒂𝟑 are lattice vectors which span 3D space
Take the Fourier transform again same as in 1D:
𝑅(𝒌) = ∑𝑢1 ,𝑢2 ,𝑢3 𝑐𝑜𝑠(𝒌 ∙ (𝑢1 𝒂𝟏 + 𝑢2 𝒂𝟐 + 𝑢1 𝒂𝟏 ))
Again, the sum will generally be non-zero only if k is a reciprocal lattice vector R(k)
𝒌 = 𝑘1 𝒃𝟏 + 𝑘2 𝒃𝟐 + 𝑘3 𝒃𝟑
Thus, one physical interpretation of the reciprocal lattice is that it is the Fourier transform of the direct
lattice, a mathematical operation which takes into account the repetition of the crystal lattice

2nd intuition: reciprocal lattice vectors as specific plane wave states
Consider a set of points R constituting a bravais lattice and a generic plane wave 𝑒 𝑖𝒌∙𝒓
For a general value of k, such a plane wave will not have the periodicity of the lattice, but for a certain
choice of k, it will:
The set of all wavevectors K which yields plane waves with the periodicity of the lattice is known as the
reciprocal lattice
The way to state this mathematically, is that the following expression applies for all spatial coordinates r
(why? Because the R vector is defined as a translation operation which leaves the lattice invariant):
𝑒 𝑖𝑲∙(𝒓+𝑹) = 𝑒 𝑖𝑲∙𝒓
𝑒 𝑖𝑲∙𝑹 = 1

This expression holds if 𝑲 ∙ 𝑹 is an integer multiple of 2𝜋, which we showed in the exercise above

Scattering: application of reciprocal lattice
Old way:

Ray 1 travels a distance 2𝑑𝑠𝑖𝑛𝜃 longer than ray 2
For them to constructively interfere, this path length difference, must be an integer multiple of the
wavelength of light, 𝑛𝜆
This gives the usual formulation of Bragg’s law, 2𝑑𝑠𝑖𝑛𝜃 = 𝑛𝜆
Bragg’s law can be reformulated using the reciprocal lattice
Theorem: the set of reciprocal lattice vectors G determines the possible x-ray reflections

In the figure above, the incident beam is a plane wave given by 𝑒 𝑖𝒌∙𝑟 . We consider the wave scattered
from two different positions in the solid: the origin (given by O) and a volume element r away, called dV.
The wavevector k encodes the wavelength of the light 𝑘 = 2𝜋/𝜆 and also its propagation direction.
Step 1: find phase difference of the incoming beams as they travel to O as compared to dV (confusing
point in figure: k and r have different units)

The path length difference is given by 𝑟𝑠𝑖𝑛𝜙
Lets express that path length difference as a phase difference (what fraction of 2pi?)
In words, the phase difference is given by

path length difference
∗ 2𝜋.
wavelength

The first term gives the number of

wavelengths which fit in the path length difference (not necessarily an integer) and the factor of 2𝜋 tells
you what fraction of a full wave cycle this path length difference corresponds to. This gives a phase
difference of 2𝜋𝑟 𝑠𝑖𝑛𝜙/𝜆
Remember, 𝑘 =

2𝜋
𝜆

(definition of wave number)

Thus, the phase difference of the incoming beam going to O vs going to dV is 𝒌 ∙ 𝒓 (check graphically
that the segment we are talking about indeed represents the component of r that is along k)
Step 2: find phase difference of diffracted beam from O vs dV
For the diffracted beam, if we go through the same exercise, we will get −𝒌′ ∙ 𝒓 (the negative factor
comes because k’ points in the opposite direction relative to r; also, there is a typo in your textbook in
labeling the outgoing beam, it should be 𝑒 𝑖𝒌′∙𝒓 )
Thus the total phase angle difference is (𝒌 − 𝒌′) ∙ 𝒓
′

The wave scattered from dV has a phase factor of 𝑒 𝑖(𝒌−𝒌 )∙𝒓 relative to the wave scattered from the
origin located distance r away.
Define Δ𝐤 = 𝐤′ − 𝐤

Now, we have to account for the fact that we are not just considering two scatterers, but we are
considering an array of scatterers. The relative positions of all of these scatters are given by the lattice
vectors: 𝑹 = 𝑢1 𝒂𝟏 + 𝑢2 𝒂𝟐 + 𝑢3 𝒂𝟑
The total phase factor from this array of scatterers is given by:
𝐹(Δ𝒌) = ∑ 𝑒 𝑖Δ𝒌∙𝒓𝒋
𝑗

The intensity of the scattered beam:

|𝐹(Δ𝒌)|2 = ∑ 𝑒 𝑖Δ𝒌∙(𝒓𝒊 −𝒓𝒋 )
𝑖,𝑗

The separation between any two scatterers in a bravais lattice is given by a translation vector of the
lattice:
|𝐹(Δ𝒌)|2 = ∑ 𝑒 𝑖Δ𝒌∙(𝑢1 𝑎1 +𝑢2 𝑎2 +𝑢3 𝑎3 )
𝑖,𝑗

Each of the exponential terms will be equal to 1 if Δ𝒌 = 𝑮 where G is a vector of the reciprocal lattice.
This is called the Laue condition.
Most scattering experiments used to determine crystal structure are elastic experiments, meaning the
energy (and wavelength) of the incoming and outgoing beam are the same. This also means that the
magnitudes of the wavevectors are equal:
|𝒌| = |𝒌′ | and 𝑘 2 = 𝑘 ′2
With this, the diffraction condition can be re-written as:
𝑮 = 𝒌′ − 𝒌
(𝒌 + 𝑮)2 = 𝑘 ′ 2 = 𝑘 2
(𝑘 2 + 2𝒌 ∙ 𝑮 + 𝐺 2 ) = 𝑘 2
2𝒌 ∙ 𝑮 + 𝐺 2 = 0
2𝒌 ∙ 𝑮 = 𝐺 2 (we can do this because if G is a vector of the reciprocal lattice, so is –G)
Detour: Miller indices
The process of finding miller indices:
1. Find the intercepts on the axes in terms of the lattice constants 𝑎1 , 𝑎2 , 𝑎3 ; Integer or fractional
intercepts are fine
2. Take the reciprocals of these numbers and reduce to 3 smallest integers
3. Express result as 3 numbers in parentheses, usually no commas (hkl)
Below: examples for cubic lattice

Remember, a crystal lattice can be divided up into equivalent planes, a concept which is formalized via
miller indices in Ch 1 of your textbook. The spacing between adjacent planes with a specific miller index
is called d(hkl).
It turns out that 𝑑(ℎ𝑘𝑙) = 2𝜋/|𝑮| where 𝑮 = ℎ𝒃𝟏 + 𝑘𝒃𝟐 + 𝑙𝒃𝟑 is normal to the plane of interest (we
will show this for specific examples shortly).

Plugging this result back in to 2𝒌 ∙ 𝑮 = 𝐺 2 we get

2(

2𝜋
2𝜋
2𝜋 2
) (𝑠𝑖𝑛𝜃)
=(
)
𝜆
𝑑(ℎ𝑘𝑙)
𝑑(ℎ𝑘𝑙)

(𝜃 is the angle of the incident beam relative to the planes. The sine comes in because G is normal to the
plane of interest, and the dot product takes the component of one vector along the direction of the
other)
Simplifying the expression above:
4𝜋𝑠𝑖𝑛𝜃
2𝜋
=
𝜆
𝑑(ℎ𝑘𝑙)
2𝑑(ℎ𝑘𝑙)𝑠𝑖𝑛𝜃 = 𝜆
This is basically the Bragg condition, sans a factor of integer n in front of . This is missing because the
definition of miller indices we use explicitly removes common integer divisors. E.g. (h/n,k/n,l/n) would
be reduced to just the (hkl) plane by the definition.
Thus, we have shown the equivalency of Bragg’s law and a scattering formalism using the reciprocal
lattice.
Methods for measuring crystal structures in reciprocal space
Bragg’s law will work if d is of similar magnitude to 𝜆
Object
Diffraction grating in class (𝑑~1𝜇𝑚)
Planes of crystal (𝑑~1 − 10Å)
Planes of crystal (𝑑~1 − 10Å)

Source of diffracted wave
Laser pointer, 𝜆 = 532 𝑛𝑚
x-rays, 𝜆~0.1 − 10Å

Planes of crystal (𝑑~1 − 10Å)

Electrons, 𝜆 =

ℎ
𝑝
ℎ
~0.1 − 1Å
𝑝

Neutrons, 𝜆 = ~0.3 − 2Å

Earlier in this lecture, there was a picture of
neutron scattering data. Below are some
other common methods for using x-rays and
wave-like particles to learn about structure. I
will not give too much background about
measurements, as the intent is just to get
used to seeing them and understand what
information is extracted from them.
The first two experiments deal use x-rays to
measure rock salt (NaCl). This material has a
cubic crystal structure, based on the FCC
lattice, where each lattice point has one Na
and one Cl atom.

Method 1: Laue uses white’ (multicolor) x-rays light, and is typically used to learn about rotational
symmetries of a crystal or orient a crystal by finding a symmetric orientation. It shines a broad
spectrum x-ray light on the sample in order to meet the Bragg condition for many reciprocal lattice
points simultaneously. The image below shows a 4-fold pattern because the NaCl is oriented with one
of its 4-fold symmetric axes facing the beam.

Method 2: ‘Powder’ x-ray diffraction (XRD) uses monochromatic x-ray light. Reciprocal lattice points
are accessed either by rotating the sample (for a single crystal) or by using a ‘powder’ sample which
has crystallites of all possible orientation. This is by far the most common technique for characterizing
crystal structures with x-rays. This graph should be read in terms of the Bragg formula: 2𝑑𝑠𝑖𝑛𝜃 = 𝑛𝜆
where the x-axis is plotted as 2𝜃 because that is the angle difference between the incoming and
outgoing beam. The labels above the peaks are the Miller indices. When the Bragg formula is applied
to this experiment, 𝜆 is fixed and known, while the material has a fixed number of ways to divide it
into planes. Thus only select angles 𝜃 correspond to those select planar spacings, d.

The image below shows Low Energy Electron Diffraction (LEED) data for NaCl. The electron gun
shadowing the image is a giveaway that this is some sort of electron
diffraction technique. Different reciprocal lattice points (bright
dots) correspond to different reflection angles of electrons and
hence different positions on the detector. Electron diffraction
techniques are extremely surface sensitive (an atomic layer or two),
x-rays have slightly deeper penetration depth (a micron or so), and
neutrons are truly bulk sensitive.

Figure 2. Image source:
https://doi.org/10.1016/S00396028(01)01391-7

